Cold cold cold. We were all so cold. 

Until now, Bigfoot Cave's reputation as an icebox had seemed overblown. There had been many admonitions to layer heavily, and hypothermia was referenced as an obvious consequence of any possible accident. But for the previous 13 hours we had been stemming, hurdling, scrambling, squeezing, climbing, and crawling; our bodies were stoked into furnaces.

Now, we were exhausted and waiting, and the cave was greedy to steal away the last hints of bodily warmth in our extremities. The situation that was forcing our wait was unanticipated... Now additional and sobering adventure was presented to us after an already long and sporty visit to this place.

Initially, attempts were made to force movement to generate heat, and to stoke somewhat affected energetic conversations to keep up morale. But the cold wins wars of attrition, and the team got quieter and still. One by one, we fumbled to produce contractor bags and candles. We disappeared into Palmer Furnaces, motionless growths on a grey floor.

I stared into the blaze of my tea candle, the only object in my contractor bag universe, and I thought about what had come before.
_____

It was soon to be Labor Day weekend. Noah Leonard and I drove into the evening darkness having departed the lights of I5 on our trip Southward from Washington State to Northern California. Now we were close, and so pointed our vehicle down a ribbon of road toward where our attention had already been for the last 9 hours of travel: the Marble Mountain Wilderness. Neither of us had been here before and we were religious pilgrims. We were filled with anticipation to be visiting what lived in our minds as the one true shrine.

The Labor Day weekend was organized to be a gathering of Marbles project cavers, and on Saturday morning we gratefully surrendered heavy bags of camping and caving gear to pack mule herders who had been organized to assist us all in moving supplies up the mountain to base camp. These animals actualize the possibility for many cavers to bring sufficient supplies to spend much more than the extended weekend high up in the Marble Valley, where many alluring objectives demand time. Here cavers discover new entrances, caves, leads and connections with every trip. Time to work and explore with others who are capable is the only bottleneck.

We hiked up the mountain towards camp, enjoying an alpine forest that seemed to be the very beginning, or very end, of the sort of temperate rainforest that was familiar from coastal Oregon and Washington. This was more sun kissed, more open... More reds with the greens. Eventually, some brilliant whites and grays in the form of marble stone began to appear throughout the forest, breaching through the earth into the open air. 

We arrived to a large clearing that was the site of our base camp. From here in the Marble Valley, the "upper karst" was visible, an expansive field of brilliant white karst extending skyward for 1000 feet, tiling the slope toward the summit of Black Marble Mountain. In this clearing was already established a small village of tents belonging to those who had arrived days earlier. Elite cavers from all over the country were engaged in activity. Some were returning from caving trips, some were preparing for caving trips, and some were recovering from caving trips. It was apparent that the 24-hour clock of the surface world had been disregarded in favor of the stamina-based clock of project caving. Gear for aid climbs and surveys was being organized, reorganized, and staged by returning crews to be handed over to departing crews -- evidence of coordination and communication born of mission-mindedness.

We greeted and met the cavers who were about, as always impressed by the uniqueness, friendliness, and intelligence of our breed. In this case, it was also obvious the caliber of these cavers; this was a gathering of those who were prepared, fit, and who could do just about every aspect of our pursuit with skill. We admitted to this being our first visit, and hungry to experience the cave system, we set about trying to find folks not in the midst of ongoing work.

Eventually we found both the cavers and cave information we needed to spend the second half of our day underground. We geared up and hike off towards "Toothpaste Tube".
_______



